OSDOCS#11515:Add MicroShift observability via OTEL integration (#92758)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/microshift-otel-config-size.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * microshift_configuring/microshift_telemetry-service.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-otel-config-size_{context}"]
= Setting {microshift-short} Observability configurations

The amount and complexity of the retrieved data depends on predefined configurations. These configurations determine the number of data sources and the amount of collected data that is transmitted. The configurations are defined as small, medium, and large (default).

> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.

Reviewer: Users should ONLY replace the variables under the `exporters` and `services` nodes. If the variable under the `receivers` node is changed, the service will fail because it will not be able to communicate with MicroShift.

```suggestion
Replace the values of fields `exporters.otlp.endpoint` and `services.telemetry.metrics.readers[0].endpoint` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.
```

.Procedure

The `Opentelemtry-collector.yaml` file includes a minimal set of data for monitoring the system, node, and workload resource use for the cpu, memory, disk drive, and network. All warnings for cluster events are included in the collected data. This setting transmits the following data:

> * Container, pod, and node metrics

Author: @pmtk on line 15, should the "...use for the CPU, memory, disk drive, and network." stay? It seems to me that the sentence should end with "...and workload resource use."

> The `opentelemtry-collector.yaml` file includes a minimal set of data for monitoring the system, node, and workload resource use for the CPU, memory, disk drive, and network. All warnings for cluster events are included in the collected data. This setting transmits the following data:

Reviewer 2: I would remove the "minimal" because default is large, so it's not minimal :)
I actually removed that description from the file in ushift repo (https://github.com/openshift/microshift/pull/4903).

```suggestion
The `opentelemetry-collector.yaml` file includes a minimal set of data for monitoring the system, node, and workload resource use for the CPU, memory, disk drive, and network. All cluster events are included in the collected data. This setting transmits the following data:
```

> * CPU, memory, disk, and network metrics of containers, pods, and node
> * Kubernetes events (warnings only)
> * Host cpu, memory, disk, and network metrics
> * System journals for certain {microshift-short} services, dependencies, and priorities

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Resource usage metrics of MicroShift's Containers, Pods, Volumes, and Node
* Kubernetes Events
* Host's CPU, memory, disk, and network usage metrics
* System journals for selected MicroShift services and dependencies, priority < Info
* Metrics exposed by Pods that have "prometheus.io/scrape": "true" annotation
```

.Setting the data configuration to large

> Update the `config-yaml` file with the following information to set a large configuration. `Large` is the default configuration.

Reviewer: Yes. I don't remember what the intent was, but I do remember trying to follow this general guideline:

Large: All system data, all cluster data
Medium: All cluster data
Small: minimal cluster data

> Update the `config-yaml` file with the following information to set a large configuration. `Large` is the default configuration.

Reviewer: We should also probably make the `opentelemetry-config.yaml` file a symlink to the `opentelemetry-config-large.yaml`, rather than have to maintain a copy of each. WDYT?

> Update the `config-yaml` file with the following information to set a large configuration. `Large` is the default configuration.

Reviewer 2: I'll prepare a change

[source,yaml]
----
receivers:
  kubeletstats:
    auth_type: tls
    ca_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/ca-bundle/client-ca.crt
    key_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.key
    cert_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.crt
    insecure_skip_verify: true
    collection_interval: 20s
    endpoint: "${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:10250" <1>
    node: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}
    k8s_api_config:
      auth_type: kubeConfig
  k8s_events:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
  hostmetrics:
    root_path: /
    collection_interval: 10s
    scrapers:
      cpu:
      memory:
      network:
      disk:

>       filesystem:
>   journald:
>     units:
>       - microshift
>       - microshift-observability
>       - microshift-etcd
>       - crio
>       - openvswitch.service
>       - ovsdb-server.service
>       - ovs-vswitchd.service
> processors:
>   batch:
>   resourcedetection/system:
>     detectors: [ "system" ]
>     system:
>       hostname_sources: [ "os" ]
> 
> exporters:
>   otlp:
>     sending_queue:
>       storage: file_storage
>     endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317
>     tls:
>       insecure: true
> 
> extensions:
>   file_storage:
>     directory: /var/lib/microshift-observability
> 
> service:
>   extensions: [ file_storage ]
>   pipelines:
>     metrics/kubeletstats:
>       receivers: [ kubeletstats ]
>       processors: [ batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     metrics/hostmetrics:
>       receivers: [ hostmetrics ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     logs/kube_events:
>       receivers: [ k8s_events ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     logs/host:
>       receivers: [ hostmetrics ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     logs/journald:
>       receivers: [ journald ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>   telemetry:
>     metrics:
>       readers:
>         - periodic:
>             exporter:
>               otlp:
> 
> ----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
----
receivers:
  kubeletstats:
    auth_type: tls
    ca_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/ca-bundle/client-ca.crt
    key_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.key
    cert_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.crt
    insecure_skip_verify: true
    collection_interval: 10s
    endpoint: "${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:10250"
    node: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}
    k8s_api_config:
      auth_type: kubeConfig
  k8s_events:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
  hostmetrics:
    root_path: /
    collection_interval: 10s
    scrapers:
      cpu:
      memory:
      network:
      disk:
      filesystem:
  journald:
    units:
      - microshift
      - microshift-observability
      - microshift-etcd
      - crio
      - openvswitch.service
      - ovsdb-server.service
      - ovs-vswitchd.service
    priority: info
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: k8s
          scrape_interval: 10s
          kubernetes_sd_configs:
            - kubeconfig_file: /var/lib/microshift/resources/observability-client/kubeconfig
              role: pod
          relabel_configs:
              # Only scrape Pods with annotation "prometheus.io/scrape": "true"
            - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_scrape]
              action: keep
              regex: true
              # Use value of "prometheus.io/path" annotation for scraping
            - source_labels: [__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_path]
              action: replace
              target_label: __metrics_path__
              regex: (.+)
              # Use value of "prometheus.io/port" annotation for scraping
            - source_labels: [__address__, __meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port]
              action: replace
              regex: ([^:]+)(?::\d+)?;(\d+)
              replacement: $1:$2
              target_label: __address__

processors:
  batch:
  resourcedetection/system:
    detectors: [ "system" ]
    system:
      hostname_sources: [ "os" ]

exporters:
  otlp:
    sending_queue:
      storage: file_storage
    endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317 <1>
    tls:
      insecure: true

extensions:
  file_storage:
    directory: /var/lib/microshift-observability

service:
  extensions: [ file_storage ]
  pipelines:
    metrics/kubeletstats:
      receivers: [ kubeletstats ]
      processors: [ batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    metrics/hostmetrics:
      receivers: [ hostmetrics ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    logs/kube_events:
      receivers: [ k8s_events ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    logs/host:
      receivers: [ hostmetrics ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    logs/journald:
      receivers: [ journald ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    metrics/pods:
      receivers: [ prometheus ]
      processors: [ batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      readers:
        - periodic:
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf
                endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318 <2>
----
```

<1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.

.Setting the data configuration to medium

>  Update the `config-yaml` file with the following information to set a medium configuration:

Reviewer: See https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/92758#discussion_r2087044588

> <1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the `microshift-observability` service logs.

Reviewer 2: I think we might want to change that variable name to avoid confusion...

```suggestion
<1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the `microshift-observability` service logs.
<2> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the `microshift-observability` service logs.
```

[source,yaml]
----
 receivers:
  kubeletstats:

>     auth_type: tls
>     ca_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/ca-bundle/client-ca.crt
>     key_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.key
>     cert_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.crt
>     insecure_skip_verify: true
>     collection_interval: 10s
>     endpoint: "${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:10250" <1>
>     node: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}
>     k8s_api_config:
>       auth_type: kubeConfig
>   k8s_events:
>     auth_type: kubeConfig
>   journald:
>     units:
>       - microshift
> 
> processors:
>   batch:
>   resourcedetection/system:
>     detectors: [ "system" ]
>     system:
>       hostname_sources: [ "os" ]
> 
> exporters:
>   otlp:
>     sending_queue:
>       storage: file_storage
>     endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317
>     tls:
>       insecure: true
> 
> extensions:
>   file_storage:
>     directory: /var/lib/microshift-observability
> 
> service:
>   extensions: [ file_storage ]
>   pipelines:
>     metrics/kubeletstats:
>       receivers: [ kubeletstats ]
>       processors: [ batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     logs/kube_events:
>       receivers: [ k8s_events ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     logs/journald:
>       receivers: [ journald ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>   telemetry:
>     metrics:
>       readers:
>         - periodic:
>             exporter:
>               otlp:
>                 protocol: http/protobuf
>                 endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318
> ----                
> <1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the `microshift-observability` service logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
----
 receivers:
  kubeletstats:
    auth_type: tls
    ca_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/ca-bundle/client-ca.crt
    key_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.key
    cert_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.crt
    insecure_skip_verify: true
    collection_interval: 10s
    endpoint: "${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:10250"
    node: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}
    k8s_api_config:
      auth_type: kubeConfig
  k8s_events:
    auth_type: kubeConfig
  journald:
    units:
      - microshift
    priority: info

processors:
  batch:
  resourcedetection/system:
    detectors: [ "system" ]
    system:
      hostname_sources: [ "os" ]

exporters:
  otlp:
    sending_queue:
      storage: file_storage
    endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317 <1>
    tls:
      insecure: true

extensions:
  file_storage:
    directory: /var/lib/microshift-observability

service:
  extensions: [ file_storage ]
  pipelines:
    metrics/kubeletstats:
      receivers: [ kubeletstats ]
      processors: [ batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    logs/kube_events:
      receivers: [ k8s_events ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    logs/journald:
      receivers: [ journald ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      readers:
        - periodic:
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf
                endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318 <2>
----                
<1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the `microshift-observability` service logs.
<2> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the `microshift-observability` service logs.
```

.Setting the data configuration to small
 Update the `/etc/microshift/observability/opentelemetry-collector.yaml` file with the following information to set a small configuration:
[source,yaml]
----
 receivers:

>   kubeletstats:
>     auth_type: tls
>     ca_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/ca-bundle/client-ca.crt
>     key_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.key
>     cert_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.crt
>     insecure_skip_verify: true
>     collection_interval: 10s
>     endpoint: "${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:10250" <1>
>     node: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}
>     k8s_api_config:
>       auth_type: kubeConfig
>   k8s_events:
>     auth_type: kubeConfig
> 
> processors:
>   batch:
>   resourcedetection/system:
>     detectors: [ "system" ]
>     system:
>       hostname_sources: [ "os" ]
> 
> exporters:
>   otlp:
>     sending_queue:
>       storage: file_storage
>     # Endpoint must point to an ip or hostname and port of an otlp service. Here, the K8S_NODE_NAME is used because it
>     # will be resolved to the local node's hostname automatically. An unreachable endpoint will reported in the logs
>     # of the microshift-observability service.
>     endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317
>     tls:
>       insecure: true
> 
> extensions:
>   file_storage:
>     directory: /var/lib/microshift-observability
> 
> service:
>   extensions: [ file_storage ]
>   pipelines:
>     metrics/kubeletstats:
>       receivers: [ kubeletstats ]
>       processors: [ batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>     logs/kube_events:
>       receivers: [ k8s_events ]
>       processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
>       exporters: [ otlp ]
>   telemetry:
>     metrics:
>       readers:
>         - periodic:
>             exporter:
>               otlp:
>                 # Endpoint must point to an ip or hostname and port of an otlp service. Here, the K8S_NODE_NAME is used
>                 # because it will be resolved to the local node's hostname automatically. An unreachable endpoint will
>                 # reported in the logs of the microshift-observability service.
>                 protocol: http/protobuf
>                 endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318
> ----
> <1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
----
 receivers:
  kubeletstats:
    auth_type: tls
    ca_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/ca-bundle/client-ca.crt
    key_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.key
    cert_file: /var/lib/microshift/certs/admin-kubeconfig-signer/openshift-observability-client/client.crt
    insecure_skip_verify: true
    collection_interval: 10s
    endpoint: "${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:10250"
    node: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}
    k8s_api_config:
      auth_type: kubeConfig
  k8s_events:
    auth_type: kubeConfig

processors:
  batch:
  resourcedetection/system:
    detectors: [ "system" ]
    system:
      hostname_sources: [ "os" ]

exporters:
  otlp:
    sending_queue:
      storage: file_storage
    endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317 <1>
    tls:
      insecure: true

extensions:
  file_storage:
    directory: /var/lib/microshift-observability

service:
  extensions: [ file_storage ]
  pipelines:
    metrics/kubeletstats:
      receivers: [ kubeletstats ]
      processors: [ batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
    logs/kube_events:
      receivers: [ k8s_events ]
      processors: [ resourcedetection/system, batch ]
      exporters: [ otlp ]
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      readers:
        - periodic:
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf
                endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318 <2>
----
<1> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.
<2> Replace the variable `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address resolves to the local node's host name. Any unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.
```
